## Part 2 :DC Machines
### 2.1: What is Electrical Machine
* The machines is composed by Motors and Generators.(The word machine is commonly used for both generator and motor)
* The motors change Electrical power input $(v,i)$to Mechanical output($\tau , \omega$).
* The generators change Mechanical power $(\tau,\omega)$ to Electrical power output($v,i$). 
* The energy conservation can be written as : $vi=\tau \omega$
* The DC machine have several application :Washing machine, drill,automotive machines and medical surgery devices.
### 2.2: DC motors vs induction motors(AC)
* DC motors have more rated torque at low speed than AC motors.(High starting torque)
* Induction motors have much higher torque at high speed.
* -
* -
* -
* -
* -
* -
* DC motor advantages and disadvantages:
    * The Advantages:
        * High starting torque
        * Rapidly acceleration and deceleration
        * Speed can be easily controlled over a wide range.
        * Used in tough jobs.
        * Build in wide range of sizes
    * The disadvantages:
        * Need regular maintenance
        * Can not be employed in explosive (sparking) applications
        * High cost due to the complexity of armature construction
### 2.3: Principle of operation
#### 2.3.1 Magnetic fields of current
* Use the right hand rules to get the direction of current caused by the magnetic fields and vice versa.(The direction and the strength of the magnetic field is a function of the current.)
* The Biot-Savart Law and the Ampere's Law can declare that function.
* Motor action
    * A conductor in a fixed magnetic field.
    * The conductor with current will produce another magnetic field(induced magnetic field).
    * The interaction between the two magnetic fields generate the force.
    * The left hand rules can get the direction of the force.(Field $\times$ current= Force)
    * Generated force: $F=Bil$
    * The same conductor with same current ,but the direction of the current are different at both sides.
    
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * The force exerted upon the each conductor:$F=B\times i\times l$
    * The torque is given:$\tau=F\times r= Bilr$
    * Torque of 1 turn(coil): $T=2Bilr$
* Motor action: practical arrangement
    * For N series turns: $T=2NBilr$
    * In a 2-pole machine, the flux per pole is $\phi=B \times \pi rl$
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * The total torque for a 2 poles machine (N series turns) is: $T=2NBilr$
    * In a 2-pole machine, the flux per pole : $\phi=B\times\pi rl$
    * The total torque for 2-pole machine as: $T=\displaystyle\frac{2N\phi i}{\pi}$
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * We can rewrite as: $T=K_t\phi i_a$, $K_t$ is the constant of the machine, $i_a$ is the armature current.
* Generator action: operating principle
    * $e=2Blv=2Bl\omega r $
    * $T=2Bilr$
    * $i=\displaystyle\frac{T}{2Blr}$
    * $ei=\displaystyle\frac{2BlwrT}{2Blr}=\omega T$
    * i.e:power in= power out
#### 2.3.2 Initial Points of DC machine
* Current through a conductor produce a magnetic field(circular).
* Current in a conductor will suffered a force (Ampere force) in a magnetic field.
* Mechanical output in form of controllable torque and speed.
* Torque is maximized by using multiple conductors and stronger flux( using core).
#### 2.3.4 Continuous rotation
* How to archive a continuous rotation:
    * How to connect the DC supply to a rotation armature: The brushes (Carbon) are connected to the armatures.
        * -
        * -
        * -
    * The opposite force applied on both sides cause the conductor to rotating.
    * When it comes to the vertical position, the inertia will keep it moving to another horizontal position.
### 2.4 Machine Construction
* -
* -
* -
* -
* -
* Basic parts of the DC machine:
    * The armature (rotating part)
        * The major power carrying element- situated on the armature.
        * Laminated core (reduce eddy current) and winding in slots, which given :
            * mechanical strength
            * shorter effective air-gap length
            * maximizing field flux
    * The commutators:
        * The set of coppers segments arranged as a cylinder
        * End of each coil attached to adjacent commutator segments.
        * -
        * -
        * -
        * -
    * The brushes:carbon
    * The field circuit
        * Wound fields and Permanent Magnet field circuits.
        * Wound type:
            * The magnetic filed is generated by electricity.
            * Field can be controlled(magnitude and direction)
            * More losses
        * Permanent Magnet:
            * Generated by magnetic materials.
            * Smaller and less losses.
            * Less controllability. 
### 2.5 Machine Configuration (types)
* Separately excited:
    * The armature and fields windings are electrically separate.
    * The field winding is supplied by a separate DC source whose voltage is variable.
    * Good Speed control.
    * -
    * -
    * - 
* Self-excited:
    * shunt:
        * Armature and field windings connected in parallel across the same DC supply.
        * Constant speed characteristic.
        * -
        * -
        * -
    * Series:
        * Specially constructed motor wit field winding in series with armature.
        * Field winding only as a few turns as it take the full load current.
        * High starting torque.
        * -
        * -
        * -
    * Compound
* Permanent Magnet:
    * Advantage:
        * Low cost
        * Simple operation
        * No copper losses
    * Disadvantage:
        * Less controllability
        * Strong potential source of electromagnetic interference. 
### 2.6 The equivalent circuit of DC machine
#### 2.6.1 Separately excited DC motor
* The armature voltage is given by: $v_a=L_a\displaystyle\frac{di_a}{dt}+i_aR_a+e_b$.
* The field voltage is given by: $v_f=L_f\displaystyle\frac{di_f}{dt}+i_fR_f$
* -
* -
* -
* The steady-state armature voltage is given by: $V_a=I_aR_a+E_b$.
* The steady-state filed voltage is given by: $V_f=I_fR_f$.
* -
* -
* -
* -
* -
* The developed torque is given by $T_d=K_t\phi I_a=B\omega+T_L$, (B is friction coefficient)
* The developed power is : $P_d=T_d\omega$.
#### 2.6.2 DC Machine Model
$\leftarrow V_a,I_a \rightarrow K_t,\phi,E_b\leftarrow T_d,\omega \rightarrow$
### 2.7 Open circuit of DC machines
* Equivalent circuit:the field circuit:
    * When the magnetic filed is supplied by magnets the flux will be fixed.
    * When the field is provided by a coil(wound machine), the field flux varies withe current: $I_f\propto \phi $.
    * Consequently, we can write: $T_d=K_tI_fI_a$, $E_b=K_tI_f\omega$
* Equivalent circuit: open circuit test
    * Run the machine on no load.
    * Measure the armature voltage variation with field current.
    * $V_a\approx K_t\phi \omega$($I_f\propto \phi,I_aR_a=0 $).
    * $E_b=V_a$
### 2.8 Motor vs. generator
* Generator action: operating principle
    * $e=2Blv=2Bl\omega r$
    * $T=2Bilr$
    * $i=\displaystyle\frac{T}{2Blr}$
    * $ei=\displaystyle\frac{2Bl\omega rT}{2Blr}=\omega T$
* Motoring and generating
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * -
    * -
### 2.9 Speed control of a DC motor
#### 2.9.1 Speed control 
* As for Separately excited dc motor.
* $V_a=I_aR_a+K_t\phi \omega$, $E_b=K_t\phi \omega$
* Three parameters control the speed: $V_a,R_a,\phi$
#### 2.9.2 Armature voltage control
* $\omega=\displaystyle\frac{V_a}{K_t\phi }-\displaystyle\frac{R_a}{(K_t\phi)^2}T_d$
* -
* -
* -
* -
#### 2.9.2 Armature resistance control
* $\omega=\displaystyle\frac{V_a}{K_t\phi }-\displaystyle\frac{R_a}{(K_t\phi)^2}T_d$
* -
* -
* -
* -
#### 2.9.3 Field control
* -
* -
* -
* -
* -
#### 2.9.4 Field weakening
* Base speed $\omega_{base}$= speed at rate $V_a,I_f,I_a$.
* $\omega=0 to \omega_{base}\rightarrow$ speed control by $V_a$.
* $\omega >\omega_{base}\rightarrow$ speed control by field weakening.
* -
* -
* -
* -
### 2.10 Losses & power flow in DC machine
#### 2.10.1 Losses
* Electrical loss
* Brush loss
* Core loss
* Mechanical loss
* Stray loss
#### 2.10.2 Power flow (shunt motor)
* -
* -
* -
* -
* -
#### 2.10.3 Power flow (shunt generator)
* -
* -
* -
* -
* -
#### 2.10.4 Efficiency of DC motor
* $\eta=\displaystyle\frac{P_{out}}{P_{in}}$
* $\eta=\displaystyle\frac{P_{in}-P_{loss}}{P_{in}}$
* $\eta=1-\displaystyle\frac{\Sigma I^2R-Rotational \quad losses}{V_TI_T}$
* $\eta=\displaystyle\frac{E_bI_a-Rotational\quad Losses}{V_TI_T}$ 
